covered action in Chile 1963 to 1973
chapter second the range of covered
action in Chile a covered action and
other clandestine activities this study
is primarily concerned with what is
labeled covered action but the United
States government covered action
projects are considered a distant
category and are authorized and manage
accordingly but it is important to bear
in mind what the category excludes as
well as what it includes the committee's
purpose is to evaluate the intent and
effect of clandestine American
activities in chilling some secret
activities by the United States not
labeled covered action may have
important political impact and should be
considered the CIA conduct several kinds
of clandestine activity in foreign
countries clandestine collection of
positive foreign intelligence
counterintelligence or liason with local
services and covered action those
different activities are handle it
somewhat differently in Washington they
are usually the responsibility of
different CIA officers in the field yet
all three kinds of projects may have
effects on foreign politics all three
rely on the establishment of clandestine
relationships with foreign nationals in
the clandestine collection of
intelligence the purpose of the
relationship is gathering information a
CIA officer establishes a relationship
with a foreign asset paid or unpaid in a
party or government institution in order
to find out what is going on inside that
party or institution there is typically
no attend made by the CIA officer to
influence the actions of the asset yet
even that kind of covered relationship
may have political significance witness
the maintenance of CIA's and military
attached contacts with the Chilean
military after the inauguration of
Salvador Allende although the purpose
was information gathering the United
States maintained links to the group
most likely to overthrow the new
president to do so was to walk a
tightrope the distinction between
collection information
and exercising influence was inherently
hard to maintain since the Chilean
military perceive its actions to be
contingent to some degree on the
attitude of the US government those
possibilities for exercise and influence
scarcely would have to be consistently
manipulated liason relationships with
local police or intelligence service
pose a similar issue the CIA established
such relationships in Chile with a
primary purpose of securing assistance
in gathering intelligence on external
target but the link also provided the
station with an information on internal
subversive and opposition elements
within Chile that raised the difficulty
of ensuring that American officials did
not stray into influencing the actions
of Chile ins with home that were in
contact and it meant that the CIA was
identified to some degree with the
internal activities of Chilean police
and intelligence services whether or not
the US government supported these
actions that became a matter for great
concern in 1973 with advent of the
peanut chat regem the purpose of this
case study is to describe and assess the
range of covered us activities which
influenced the course of political
events in Chile most of the discussion
which follows is limited to activities
labeled and run as covert action
projects that category is itself broad
but it excluded other clandestine
activities with possible political
effects be covered action in Chile
techniques even if the set of activities
labeled cover action does not include
all clandestine American efforts with
possible political effects that set is
nonetheless broad us covered action in
Chile encompassed a range of techniques
and affected a wide variety of Chilean
institutions it included projects which
were regarded as the framework necessary
for covered operations as well as major
efforts come forth by special
circumstances the following paragraphs
will give you a flavor of that range
first propaganda the most extensive
cover action activity in Chile
was propaganda it was relatedly cheap in
Chile it continued at a low 11 during
normal times then was cranked up to meet
particular threats or to counter
particular dangers the most common form
of propaganda project is simply the
development of assets in media
organizations who can place articles or
be asked to write them the agency
provided to its field stations several
kinds of guidance about what source of
propaganda were desired for example one
CIA project in Chile supported from one
to five media assets during the seven
years it operated from nineteen sixty
three to nineteen seventy one most of
those assets worked for a major Santiago
daily which was the key to CIA
propaganda efforts those assets wrote
articles or editorials favorable to us
interest in the world for example
criticizing the Soviet Union in the wake
of the Czechoslovakian invasion
suppressed news items harmful to the
United States for instance about Vietnam
and authored articles critical of
Chilean leftists the covered propaganda
efforts in Chile also included black
propaganda material falsely preparing to
be the product of a particular
individual or group in the nineteen
seventy election for instance the CIA
used black propaganda to solve this
score between the Communists and the
Socialists and between the national
labor Confederation and the Chilean
Communist Party table number one
techniques of covered action
expenditures in Chile 1963 to 1973
footnote number three figures rounded to
the nearest 100 thousand dollars and
footnote technique propaganda for
elections and other support for
political parties with an amount of
eight million dollars producing and
disseminating propaganda and supporting
mass media 4 million and three hundred
thousand dollars influencing Chilean
institutions labor students peasants
and supporting private sector
organizations nine hundred thousand
dollars promoting military Coupe de Todd
less than two hundred thousand dollars
in some cases the form of propaganda was
still more direct the station finance
Chilean groups were erected world
posters best out political left it's at
times prepared by the station and engage
in other Street activities most often
these activities form part of a larger
projects intended to influence the
outcome of Chilean elections celo but in
at least one instance the activities
took place in the absence of an election
campaign of 30 odd covered action
projects undertaken by chile by the CIA
between 1961 and 1974 approximately a
half dozen at propaganda as their
principal activity propaganda was an
important subsidiary element of many
others particularly election project see
table number one press placements were
attractive because each placement might
produce a multiplier effect being picked
up and replayed by media outlets other
than the one in which it originally came
out second support for media in addition
to buy and propaganda piecemeal the
station often purchased its wholesale by
subsiding Chilean media organizations
friendly to the United States doing so
was propaganda with large instead of
placing individual items the CIA is
supported or even founded friendly media
outlets which might not have existed in
the absence of agency support from
nineteen fifty three to nineteen seventy
in Chile the station subsidized wire
services magazines written for
intellectual circles and right-wing
weekly newspaper according to the
testimony of Furman officials support
for the newspaper was terminated because
it became so inflexibly writers as to
elini eight responsible conservatives by
far the largest and probably the most
an instance of support for Amelia
organization was the money provided to
El Mercurio the major Santiago de lis
under pressure enduring the agenda
regime that support grew out of an
existing propaganda project in 1971 the
station judged at El Mercurio the most
important opposition publication could
not survive pressure from the agenda
government including intervention in the
new sprint market and the withdrawal of
government advertising the 40 committee
authorized 700,000 for el mercurio on
September 9 1971 and added another nine
hundred and sixty-five thousand dollars
to that authorization on April 11 1972 a
CIA project renewal memorandum concluded
that El Mercurio and other media outlets
supported by the agency had played an
important role in setting the stage for
September 11 1973 military coupe which
overthrew agenda third gaining influence
in chilling institutions and groups
through its cover activities in Chile
the US government sought to influence
the actions of a wide variety of
institutions and groups in Chilean
Society the specific intent of those
activities ran the gamut from attempting
to influence directly the making of
government policy to trying to counter
communist or left its influence among
organized groups in the society that
most of these projects included a
propaganda component it's obvious from
1964 through 1968 the CIA developed
contacts within the Chilean Socialist
Party in at the cabinet level of the
Chilean government projects aimed at
organized groups in Chilean Society had
more dias than efforts aim at government
institutions but the aim was similar
influencing the direction of political
events in Chile projects were directed
for example toward rest in control of
chilean university student organization
from the communists supporting a woman's
group active in chilean political
an intellectual life conveyed in the
Communist dominated central muneca de
trabajadores chilenos see UTC and
supporting democratic labor groups
exploited a civic action front group to
come back communist influence within
cultural and intellectual circles fourth
major efforts to influence Chilean
elections covered American activity was
a factor in almost every major election
in Chile in a decade between 1963 and
1973 in several instances the United
States intervention was massive the 1964
presidential election was the most
prominent example of a large-scale
election project the Central
Intelligence Agency spent more than 2.6
million dollars in support of the
election of the Christian Democratic
candidate in part to prevent the
ascension to the presidency of Marxist
Salvador Allende more than half of the
Christian Democratic candidates campaign
was financed by the United States
although he was not informed of this
assistance in addition the station
furnished support to an array of pro
Christian Democratic student woman's
professional and peasant groups to other
political parties were founded as well
in an attempt to spread the vote in
Washington an inter-agency election
committee was established composed of
State Department White House and CIA
officials that committee was paralleled
by a group in the embassy of Santiago no
special task force was established
within the CIA but the station in
Santiago was reinforced the station
assisted the Christian Democrats in
running an american-style campaign which
including polling voter registration and
get out the boat drives in addition to
cover propaganda the United States was
also involved in the nineteen seventy
presidential campaign that effort
however was smaller and did not include
support for any specific candidate it
was directed more at preventing agenda
selection than at ensuring another
candidates victory
nor have us involvements been limited to
presidential campaigns in the nineteen
sixty-five Chilean congressional
elections for instance the station was
authorized by the 303 committee to spend
up to 175 thousand dollars covered
support was provided to a number of
candidate selected by the ambassador and
the station a CIA election memorandum
suggested that the project did have some
impact including the elimination of a
number of frap left his coalition
candidate who might otherwise have one
congressional seats fifth support for
chilean political parties most covered
american support to chilean political
parties was furnished as a part of
specific efforts to influence elections
outcomes however in the several
instances the CIA provided sub-sites to
parties for more general purposes when
elections were not imminent most such
support was furnished during the agenda
years 1972 1973 when the US government
judged that without its support parties
of the center and right might not
survive either as opposition elements or
as contestants in elections several
years away in a sequence of decisions in
1971 through 1973 the 40 committee
authorized nearly four million dollars
for opposition political parties in
Chile most of this money went to the
Christian Democratic Party bdc but a
substantial portion was earmarked for
the National Party PN a conservative
group in more stridently opposed to the
idea and the government than was the PDC
an effort was also made to split the
rolling popular unity coalition by
inducing elements to break away the
funding of political parties on a large
scale in 1972 1973 was not however
without untested and Albert Mord modest
in scale in 1962 the special group
predecessor to the 40 committee
authorized several hundred thousand
dollars for an effort to build up the
police
in anticipation of the 1964 elections
smaller third sessions were made in 1963
in 1967 for support to mother elements
within the Radical Party sixth support
for private sector organizations as part
of its program of support for opposition
elements during the agenda government
the CIA provided money to several trade
organizations of the Chilean private
sector in September 1972 for instance
the 40 committee authorized twenty-four
thousand dollars in emergency support
for an anti addenda businessman
organization at that time supporting
other private sector organizations was
considered but rejected because of the
fear that those organizations might be
involved in anti-government strikes the
40 committee authorized $100,000 for
private sector organizations in October
1972 as part of the March 1973 election
project according to the CIA that money
was spent only on election activities
such as voter registration drives and
get out the vote drives in ankus 1973
the committee authorized support for
private sector groups but with
disbursement contagions on the agreement
of the ambassador and State Department
that agreement was not for coming
seventh direct efforts to promote a
military coup United States cover
efforts to affect the course of Chilean
politics reach a peak in 1970 the CIA
was directed to undertake an effort to
promote a military coup in Chile to
prevent the ascension to power of
Salvador Allende that attempt the
so-called track to is the subject of a
separate committee report and will be
discussed in section 3 below a brief
summary here will demonstrate the
extreme in American covered intervention
in Chilean politics on September
fifteenth nineteen seventy after agenda
finished first in the election but
before the Chilean Congress had chosen
between
and the runner-up alessandri footnote
number one agenda received 36 point
three percent of the vote alessandri
34.9 percent grado me know Tommy the PDC
candidate finished third with twenty
seven point eight percent and footnote
President Nixon met with Richard Helms
the director of Central Intelligence
assistant to the president for national
security affairs Henry Kissinger and the
Attorney General John Mitchell Helms was
directed to prevent again live from
taking power this effort was to be
conducted without the knowledge of the
department's of State and Defense or the
Ambassador track to was never discussed
at the Ford committee meeting it quickly
became apparent to both White House and
CIA officials then a military coupe was
the only way to prevent again this
accession to power to achieve that end
the CIA established contact with several
groups of military plotters and
eventually passed three weapons and tear
gas to one group the weapons were
subsequently returned apparently unused
the CIA knew that the plans of all
groups of plotters began with the
abductions of the constitutionalist
chief of staff of the chilean army
general Rhenish neither the committee
has received conflicting testimony about
the extent of CIA White House
communication and of white health
officials awareness of specific coop
plans but there is no doubt that the US
government sought a military coop in
Chile on october twenty second one group
of plotters attempted to kidnap Snyder
Snyder resisted was shot and
subsequently died the CIA had been in
touch with that group of plotters but a
week earlier had withdrawn in support
for the group's specific plans the coup
plot in collapse an agenda was ignited
president after his election the CIA and
the US military attache maintained
contact with Chilean military for the
purpose of collecting intelligence
whether those contracts straight inter
encouraging the Chilean military to move
against agenda or whether the Chilean
military haven't been goaded to work a
coup during track 2 to encourage men to
act against the precedents from those
contacts even though US officials did
not intend to provide it these are major
questions which are inherent in us
covered activities in the period of
agendas government SI cover action and
multinational corporations in addition
to providing information and cover to
the CIA multinational corporations also
participated in cover attempts to
influence Chilean politics the following
is a brief description of the CIA's
relationship with one such corporation
in Chile in the period 1963 to 1973
international telephone and telegraph
inc ITT not only itt the most prominent
and public example but a great deal of
information has been developed on the
CIA ITT relationship this summary is
based on new information provided to
this committee and a material previously
made public by the subcommittee of
multinational corporations of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee first 1964
Chilean elections during the nineteen
sixty four presidential campaign
representatives of multinational
corporations approached the CIA with a
proposal to provide campaign funds to
the Christian Democratic Party the CIA
decision not to accept such funds as
well as other CIA contacts with
multinational corporations or in that
campaign are fully described in part
three second 1970 Chilean elections
phase one in 1970 the US government and
several multinational corporations were
linked in opposition to the candidacy
and later presidency of salvador allende
this CI a multinational corporation
connection can be divided in two phases
phase one comprised actions taken by
either the CIA or us-based
national companies at a time when it was
official US policy not to sport even
covered Lee any candidate or party in
Chile during this phase the agency was
however authorized to engage in a
covered spoiling operation designed to
defeat Salvador Allende face to
encompass the relationship between
intelligence agencies and multinational
corporations after the September 1970
general election during phase two the US
government opposed to DNA and supported
opposition element the government saw
the cooperation of multinational
corporations in this effort a number of
multinational corporations were pre
hensive about the possibility that
agenda would be elected president of
chile agendas public announcement
indicated his intention if elected to
nationalize basic industries and to
bring under a Chilean ownership services
industry such as the national telephone
company which was at the time of
subsidiary of ITT in 1964 addenda had
been defeated and it was widely known
both in Chile and among American
multinational corporations with
significant interest in Chile that his
opponents had been supported by the
United States government John McCone a
former CIA director and a member of
ITT's Board of Directors in 1970 knew of
the significant American government
involvement in 1964 end of the offer of
assistance made at that time by American
companies agency documents indicated
mikone informed Harold Janine ITT's
board chairman of these facts in 1970
leaders of American multinational
corporations with substantial interest
in Chile together with other American
citizens concerned about what might
happen to Chile in the event of an
agendas victory contact US government
officials in order to make their views
known in July 1970 a CIA representative
in Santiago met with representative of
itt
and in a discussion of the upcoming
election indicated that Alessandra could
use financial assistance the station
suggested the name of an individual who
could be used as a secure channel
together these funds to the Alessandra
campaign shortly thereafter young mikone
telephone CIA director Richard Helms as
a result of this call a meeting was
arranged between the chairman of the
board of ITT and the chief of the
Western Hemisphere division of the CIA
Janine offered to make available to the
CIA a substantial amount of money to be
used in support of the alessandra
campaign in subsequent meetings itt
offered to make 1 million dollars
available to the CIA the CIA rejected
the offer the memorandum indicated
further that CIA's advice was sought
with respect to an individual who might
serve as a conduit of ITT funds to the
alessandra campaign the CIA confirmed
that the individual in question was a
reliable channel which could be used for
getting funds to alessandra a second
channel funds from itt to a political
party opposing agenda the national body
was developed following CIA advised as
to a secured funding mechanism utilizing
two CIA assets in Chile this assets were
also receiving agency funds in
connection with the spoiling operation
during the period prior to the September
election itt representatives met
frequently with CIA representatives both
in chile and in the united states and
CIA advised itt as to which in witham
might safely channel funds both to the
elisandra campaign and to the National
Party CIA was kept informed of the
extent and the mechanism of the funding
eventually at least three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars was passed by itt
to this campaign a roughly equal amount
was passed by other US companies the CIA
learned of this funding but did not
assist in it third following the 1970
Chilean election
phase two following the sep tember for
elections the United States government
adopted a policy of economic pressure
directed against Chile and in this
connection sought to enlist the
influence of Janean and other American
businessmen specifically the State
Department was directed by the 40
committee to contact American businesses
have an interest in Chile to see they
could be induced to take actions in
accord with the American government's
policy of economic pressure on chili on
September 29 the chief of the Western
Hemisphere division of the CIA met with
a representative of itt the CIA official
sought to have itt involved in a more
active way in chile according to CIA
document itt took note of the CIA
presentation on economic warfare but did
not actively respond to it one
institution in Chile which was used in a
general anti again the effort was the
newspaper chain and mercurial both the
United States government and ITT were
funneling money into the hands of
individuals associated with a paper that
funding continued after again they was
in office a great deal of testimony had
been taken on the above matters
initially before the subcommittee on
multinational corporations the degree of
cooperation between the CIA and ITT in
the period prior to the September 90
election raises an important question
while the US government was not
supporting particular candidate or
parties even covertly was the CIA
authorized to act on his own and in
advising or assist in itt and discovered
financial support of the alessandra
campaign